add proposal for multi namespace topic operator (#204)
strimzi/proposals: 133-multi-namespace-topic-operator.md

### Deletion semantics

The UTO uses Kubernetes finalizers to ensure that deleting a `KafkaTopic` also deletes the corresponding Kafka topic. This behavior is unchanged in the multi-namespace case.

When the **owning** `KafkaTopic` (the oldest one) is deleted:
1. The finalizer logic deletes the Kafka topic from the Kafka cluster.
2. Any other `KafkaTopic` CRs in other namespaces that referenced the same Kafka topic will have their status updated to reflect that the topic no longer exists. They can then be cleaned up by their respective namespace owners, or if left in place, they will attempt to recreate the topic on their next reconciliation (becoming the new owner since no conflict exists).

When a **non-owning** `KafkaTopic` (one with `ResourceConflict` status) is deleted:
1. The finalizer is removed without deleting the Kafka topic (same as existing UTO behavior for conflicting resources).
2. No impact on the owning `KafkaTopic` or the Kafka topic itself.

The existing `strimzi.io/managed: false` annotation continues to work as before — it allows a `KafkaTopic` to be deleted without deleting the Kafka topic, enabling ownership transfers.

> ### Preventing overlapping Topic Operator instances

Author: >  How does the operator know it is in single namespace or multi namespace mode? 

according to the `watchedNamespaces` field, if its the plural its multi namespace, if its the singular, its single namespace 

> How does it know if there are more clusters (more TOs watching the same namespace) or not?

if its multi namespace it uses the strimzi.io/cluster = <namespace_of_to>/<kafka_name> label, so if you have 2 TO watching the same namespace. so if we create a topic in namespace a, its owned by TO of the namespace kafka, (due to multi namespace mode), then another TO tries to own it, it can't cuz its already managed by another TO (due to the label)

> ### Preventing overlapping Topic Operator instances

Author: OK, i had a misunderstanding on my end about the `strimzi.io/cluster` label (i mistakenly thought its controlled by the operator) 
since its controlled by the user, i updated the proposal to deprecate the short name (just cluster) and when switching from the singular to plural users should also migrate from the short to a fully name (namespace/kafka_name) 
the TO will accept both of them, but it log a warning (or we can more forceful and also skip reconciliation when this situation occurs) that there is a possibility of a conflict

> ### Preventing overlapping Topic Operator instances

Reviewer: I'm not sure it is so simple. If you just log a warning, how do you know which Topic Operator should manage it? And if you instead throw an error, you break backwards compatibility.

> ### Preventing overlapping Topic Operator instances

Author: it should be the user's responsibility to know which topic relates to which Kafka during the migration

```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/managed-by: kafka/my-cluster
```

The annotation value follows the format `<namespace>/<kafka-cr-name>`, using `/` as a separator (not `-`, which would be ambiguous).

When a TO encounters a `KafkaTopic` with a `strimzi.io/managed-by` annotation that does not match its own identity, it skips the resource and updates its status:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Ready
    status: "False"
    reason: ManagedByOtherInstance
    message: "This KafkaTopic is managed by kafka/other-cluster"
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-11-24T17:00:00Z"
```

This is a best-effort mechanism — there is a brief race window during initial reconciliation where two TOs could both attempt to claim a resource. The `strimzi.io/managed-by` annotation should be set atomically during the first reconciliation to minimize this window.

### Namespace lifecycle considerations

**Adding a namespace to `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator creates RBAC resources in the new namespace and restarts/reconfigures the TO. The TO starts watching the new namespace and reconciles any existing `KafkaTopic` resources in it.

> **Removing a namespace from `watchedNamespaces`:**

Reviewer: Sorry, maybe my comment was too confusing.
* Cluster Operator does not touch any topics. It should not remove any finalizers from them. (not 100% sure the CO is typo here or intention)
* Topic Operator would never know that some namespace was removed as it is removed through restart. So it starts with the new namespace configuration and has no idea a namespace was removed.
* And even if it knew about it, it would not have the RBAC rights to do anything with the topics because the RBAC rights are managed independently through CO, and there is no synchronization point.
* Plus we in general do not delete the user-facing custom resources.

I do not think you can really fix it to be honest. All what can be done here is that this is user's responsibility to either delete the topics first or manually later.

**Watched namespace is deleted:**
If the TO is running, it processes the finalizers normally — deleting Kafka topics as appropriate. If the TO is not running (or the namespace was already removed from the watch list), `KafkaTopic` resources with finalizers will block namespace deletion. In this case, manual finalizer removal is necessary (e.g., `kubectl patch kafkatopic <name> -n <ns> --type=json -p='[{"op": "remove", "path": "/metadata/finalizers"}]'`). This is an existing limitation of the UTO that applies equally to the single-namespace case, and should be documented as operational guidance.

**TO restart:**
On startup, the TO scans all watched namespaces to rebuild its in-memory conflict resolution map before beginning reconciliation. This is the same process used today for a single namespace, extended to multiple namespaces. Startup time increases linearly with the number of watched namespaces and `KafkaTopic` resources.

### Example

A Kafka cluster in namespace `kafka`, with topics managed by teams in `team-a` and `team-b`:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: kafka
spec:
  entityOperator:
    topicOperator:

>       watchedNamespaces:

Reviewer: Deprecation is fine. But we are not abandoning fields from one day to another. We do things in backwards compatible way.

# Multi-namespace watching for the Topic Operator

> Issue [#1206](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/1206)

Reviewer 2: UTO is the only supported implementation, so we can just refer to it as Topic Operator or TO.

## Current situation

The Unidirectional Topic Operator (UTO, [proposal 051](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/blob/main/051-unidirectional-topic-operator.md)) watches `KafkaTopic` resources in a single namespace — typically the namespace where the `Kafka` resource is deployed. The UTO reconciles topic state unidirectionally from Kubernetes to Kafka, uses `creationTimestamp`-based conflict resolution when multiple `KafkaTopic` CRs reference the same Kafka topic, and employs finalizer-based deletion.

> The UTO is deployed as a container within the Entity Operator pod, which the Cluster Operator manages. The `STRIMZI_NAMESPACE` environment variable controls which namespace the UTO watches.

Reviewer 3: I know that you talk about standalone deployment, but maybe it would be worth mentioning both modes here - so that UTO is deployed either as part of Entity Operator or it can be deployed standalone?

Author: @im-konge updated the proposal accordingly

## Motivation

> In Kubernetes clusters, it is common practice to isolate applications in separate namespaces. When a Kafka cluster is shared among multiple applications or teams, each application typically lives in its own namespace. Currently, all `KafkaTopic` resources must be created in the Kafka cluster's namespace, which creates several problems:

Reviewer 2: This is not correct. The watched namespace configuration allows the TO to watch a different namespace from where the Kafka cluster is deployed. The Kafka cluster's namespace is simply the default value.

I would suggest to rephrase to something like this: 
> Currently, the Topic Operator watches a single namespace, either the Kafka cluster's own namespace (default) or one alternative namespace configured via `watchedNamespace` field or `STRIMZI_NAMESPACE` environment variable. This is inconvenient for the following reasons:

Reviewer 2: What about this?

Author: Will rephrase

- **Access control**: Teams that need to create topics must have RBAC permissions in the Kafka namespace, which may also grant access to other infrastructure resources they should not touch.
- **Resource management**: Kubernetes namespace-level quotas, and RBAC cannot be used to separate topic ownership per team.
- **GitOps workflows**: Application teams want to declare their Kafka topics alongside their application manifests in their own namespace, not in a shared infrastructure namespace.
- **Namespace hygiene**: Hundreds of `KafkaTopic` resources from different applications co-mingle in a single namespace, making management and auditing harder.

> Allowing the Topic Operator to watch `KafkaTopic` resources across multiple namespaces solves these problems while maintaining the existing UTO semantics.

Reviewer 2: There is no need to refer to the Topic Operator as UTO, as this is the only supported implementation at the moment.

## Proposal

This proposal extends the UTO to watch `KafkaTopic` resources in multiple namespaces. It builds on the UTO's existing mechanisms for conflict resolution, deletion, and status reporting.

### Configuration

A new field `watchedNamespaces` is added to the Topic Operator configuration in the `Kafka` custom resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: kafka
spec:
  entityOperator:
    topicOperator:
      watchedNamespaces:
        - team-a
        - team-b
        - team-c
```

The `watchedNamespaces` field accepts:
- A list of specific namespace names (e.g., `["team-a", "team-b"]`)
- A wildcard `["*"]` to watch all namespaces

> The Topic Operator's own namespace (where the `Kafka` resource lives) is **always** watched implicitly. It does not need to be listed in `watchedNamespaces`. When `watchedNamespaces` is not set or is empty, the behavior is unchanged — the TO watches only its own namespace.

Reviewer 2: Why do we always add TO's namespace implicitly? In order to be backwards compatible we only need to default to that, but if the user sets a custom list, then we only watch namespaces in that list.

Reviewer 2: What about this?

Author: In my mind the watchedNamespaces list is not an override to the default behaviour but an extension of it, it doesn't make sense to me to remove the kafka cluster namespace when we omit it from the list

Reviewer 2: In most standard Kubernetes resources, the user's input completely replaces the default rather than extending it. If you want to do it differently, you should provide a clear motivation.

For the standalone Topic Operator deployment, the existing `STRIMZI_NAMESPACE` environment variable is extended to accept a comma-separated list of namespaces or `*`, consistent with how the Cluster Operator already supports multi-namespace watching.

#### Deprecation of `watchedNamespace` (singular)

The existing `spec.entityOperator.topicOperator.watchedNamespace` field is deprecated in favor of `watchedNamespaces` (plural).

**Deprecation timeline:** `watchedNamespace` continues to work in its current form but logs a deprecation warning on every Cluster Operator reconciliation. It will be removed in a future major version.

**Migration steps:** Convert `watchedNamespace: team-a` to `watchedNamespaces: [team-a]`. No other changes are required — no label changes, no RBAC changes, and no modifications to existing `KafkaTopic` resources.

> **Interaction rules:** When both `watchedNamespace` and `watchedNamespaces` are set, `watchedNamespaces` takes precedence and a warning is logged indicating that the singular field is being ignored. When only the singular field is set, the TO behaves exactly as it does today — watching the Kafka cluster's own namespace plus the single additional namespace specified.

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to use CEL validation to reject the resource at admission time when both fields are set, making the conflict a hard error rather than a runtime precedence game.

> When only the singular field is set, the TO behaves exactly as it does today — watching the Kafka cluster's own namespace plus the single additional namespace specified.

Not correct, as explained in another comment.

> **Label impact:** Migrating from the singular to the plural field does **not** require any changes to `strimzi.io/cluster` labels on existing `KafkaTopic` resources. The TO accepts both the unqualified and qualified label forms regardless of which configuration field is used. However, the unqualified form is deprecated (see below) and should be migrated to the qualified `<namespace>/<name>` form, the TO will also log a warning that there is a possiblty of multiple TO watching over the topic unless its labels is updated. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Label impact:** Migrating from the singular to the plural field does **not** require any changes to `strimzi.io/cluster` labels on existing `KafkaTopic` resources. The TO accepts both the unqualified and qualified label forms regardless of which configuration field is used. However, the unqualified form is deprecated (see below) and should be migrated to the qualified `<namespace>/<name>` form, the TO will also log a warning that there is a possibility of multiple TO watching over the topic unless its labels are updated. 
```

Author: fixed

> **Label impact:** Migrating from the singular to the plural field does **not** require any changes to `strimzi.io/cluster` labels on existing `KafkaTopic` resources. The TO accepts both the unqualified and qualified label forms regardless of which configuration field is used. However, the unqualified form is deprecated (see below) and should be migrated to the qualified `<namespace>/<name>` form, the TO will also log a warning that there is a possibility of multiple TO watching over the topic unless its labels are updated. 

Reviewer 2: It would be good to describe what happens with overlapping namespaces. The edge cases are: two or more TOs pointing to the same cluster or different clusters with the same name.

---

Another approach to solve this problem would be to leverage `STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS`. When `watchedNamespaces` is used, the CO could add a label automatically:

```yaml
  labels:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
    strimzi.io/cluster-namespace: kafka # new
```

There are multiple benefits:

- The `strimzi.io/cluster` label stays unqualified. No deprecation, no migration of existing label values.
- Two TOs pointing to `my-cluster` in namespaces `kafka` and `staging` watching the same tenant namespace would have distinct selectors and never clash.
- Single-namespace deployments that don't set `watchedNamespaces` could keep working with just `strimzi.io/cluster=my-cluster` (no CR changes).
- Logs would not be flooded by unqualified label warnings.

#### Deprecation of unqualified `strimzi.io/cluster` label

> The unqualified `strimzi.io/cluster` label (e.g., `my-cluster`) is deprecated in favor of the qualified `<namespace>/<name>` form (e.g., `kafka/my-cluster`).

Reviewer 3: So when UTO will have `watchedNamespaces: ["kafka1", "kafka2"]`, the name of the Kafka cluster will by `my-cluster` and I will create KafkaTopics with label `strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster` in both Namespaces, will they be reconciled by UTO? Or UTO will just take the KafkaTopics with such label from the Namespace it is running in only?

Author: yes, they will both be reconciled (and if they have different configuration they will lead a cycle of conflicts), its the user's responsibility to make sure this doesn't happen, This is why we log a warning about using the unqualified form

Reviewer 3: Yeah, cool. I didn't mean same KafkaTopics (like same topic names), but different topic names in different Namespaces without label having the `<kafka-namespace>/<cluster-name>`. But I think it's fine if they will be reconciled. Thanks

Maybe it would be worth mentioning? I don't remember if it was mentioned somewhere (possibly later in the proposal), but I think it would be worth to mention it here as well (something similar was in the previous section about `watchNamespaces`).

**Deprecation timeline:** The TO accepts both forms, but logs a deprecation warning for each `KafkaTopic` that uses the unqualified form on every reconciliation. The unqualified form will be removed in a future major version.

**Migration steps:** Change the `strimzi.io/cluster` label value from `my-cluster` to `kafka/my-cluster` (i.e., `<kafka-namespace>/<kafka-cluster-name>`). No other changes to the `KafkaTopic` resource are required.

**Rationale:** The qualified form is unambiguous by design — it eliminates any risk of misrouting when multiple Kafka clusters share the same name across different namespaces, without requiring detection logic in the TO.

**Scope:** This deprecation applies only to `KafkaTopic` resources managed by the Topic Operator. Other resources that use the `strimzi.io/cluster` label (e.g., `KafkaUser` resources managed by the User Operator) are not affected and continue to use the unqualified form.

### RBAC

Watching additional namespaces requires the Topic Operator to have Kubernetes RBAC permissions in those namespaces. The Cluster Operator is responsible for creating and managing these RBAC resources.

**For explicit namespace list:**

> The Cluster Operator creates a `Role` and `RoleBinding` in each watched namespace, granting the Entity Operator's `ServiceAccount` permissions to watch, list, get, and update `KafkaTopic` resources and their status.

Reviewer 3: This is correct for the mode when it is running in EntityOperator, but in standalone it should be created by user. So I guess we should change the files we are providing for standalone UTO, right?

Reviewer 2: Yes, we should also update the doc with the various deployment modes, similar to what we have for the Cluster Operator.

Author: Yes, it sounds like the best way to avoid confusion (but we would need to announce their removal, and a docs upgrade)

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I guess it should be mentioned in the proposal as here you are talking just about the EntityOperator configuration.

The Role and RoleBinding names include the Kafka cluster's namespace and name to ensure uniqueness: `strimzi-topic-operator-<kafka-namespace>-<kafka-name>`. This prevents two Kafka clusters watching the same tenant namespace from overwriting each other's RBAC resources.

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: Role
metadata:
  name: strimzi-topic-operator-kafka-my-cluster
  namespace: team-a
  labels:

>     strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster

Reviewer 3: Maybe it's a stupid question, but should the label here follow the `namespace/kafka-cluster-name` pattern?

Author: you are correct this is my miss

rules:
  - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
    resources: ["kafkatopics", "kafkatopics/status"]
    verbs: ["get", "list", "watch", "create", "patch", "update", "delete"]
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: RoleBinding
metadata:
  name: strimzi-topic-operator-kafka-my-cluster
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: team-a/my-cluster
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount

>     name: my-cluster-entity-operator

Reviewer 2: In packaging we have `strimzi-topic-operator` as SA name for standalone mode.

Author: This is an example for how the CO does creates the role binding, not the standalone manifests

### Cross-namespace conflict resolution

The UTO already maintains an in-memory map of *resolved topic name* → (`namespace`, `name`) pairs for conflict detection within a single namespace. This proposal extends that map to span all watched namespaces.

The **resolved topic name** is `spec.topicName` if set, otherwise `metadata.name`. This is critical — two `KafkaTopic` CRs in different namespaces can reference the same Kafka topic through different mechanisms:

- Namespace A: `KafkaTopic` with `metadata.name: my-topic` (no `spec.topicName`, resolves to `my-topic`)
- Namespace B: `KafkaTopic` with `metadata.name: app-topic`, `spec.topicName: my-topic` (resolves to `my-topic`)

Both reference the same Kafka topic. The conflict resolution rules are:

1. The `KafkaTopic` with the **oldest** `metadata.creationTimestamp` is the owner, regardless of which namespace it is in.
2. All other `KafkaTopic` CRs referencing the same Kafka topic get:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Ready
    status: "False"
    reason: ResourceConflict

>     message: "Managed by team-a/my-topic"

Reviewer 2: Isn't this leaking information about team-a?

Reviewer 2: What about this? It is a security concern.

Author: Will change this to a more "ambiguous" message "This Topic is already managed by another topic operator)

The qualified form is unambiguous by design. Two TOs watching overlapping namespaces (e.g., `kafka/my-cluster` and `staging/my-cluster`) do not conflict because their qualified identities are distinct label values, and each TO ignores resources labeled for the other. No detection logic is needed.

If a `KafkaTopic` is in scope for a TO but lacks the expected `strimzi.io/cluster` label entirely (e.g., due to a misconfiguration), the TO skips it silently and logs a WARN. No status writes are performed on resources the TO does not own, which prevents reconciliation fights between competing instances.

### Namespace lifecycle considerations

**Adding a namespace to `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator creates RBAC resources in the new namespace and restarts/reconfigures the TO. The TO starts watching the new namespace and reconciles any existing `KafkaTopic` resources in it.

**Removing a namespace from `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator must follow this sequence to ensure finalizers can be cleaned up before RBAC is revoked:

> 1. While RBAC still exists, the CO removes the `strimzi.io/topic-operator` finalizer from all `KafkaTopic` resources in the namespace being removed.

Reviewer 2: KafkaTopic finalizers are owned by the Topic Operator, not Cluster Operator.

Reviewer 2: What about this?

Author: Will fix

2. The CO updates the TO configuration to remove the namespace from `watchedNamespaces`.
3. The CO deletes the RBAC resources (`Role`/`RoleBinding`) for that namespace.

This ordering is critical: deleting RBAC before removing finalizers would leave the TO unable to reach the `KafkaTopic` resources, causing finalizers to block any subsequent namespace deletion.

**Watched namespace is deleted:**

> If the TO is running, it processes the finalizers normally — deleting Kafka topics as appropriate. If the TO is not running (or the namespace was already removed from the watch list), `KafkaTopic` resources with finalizers will block namespace deletion. In this case, manual finalizer removal is necessary (e.g., `kubectl patch kafkatopic <name> -n <ns> --type=json -p='[{"op": "remove", "path": "/metadata/finalizers"}]'`). This is an existing limitation of the UTO that applies equally to the single-namespace case, and should be documented as operational guidance.

Reviewer 2: This is not a limitation, but it is working as designed. You should also mention than the user has the option to disable KafkaTopic finalizers.

Author: ended up removing this section

**TO restart:**

> On startup, the TO scans all watched namespaces to rebuild its in-memory conflict resolution map before beginning reconciliation. This is the same process used today for a single namespace, extended to multiple namespaces. Startup time increases linearly with the number of watched namespaces and `KafkaTopic` resources.

Reviewer 2: Let's say we have a single Topic Operator instance reconciling multiple or all namespaces. One of them could generate a lot of KT events starving the others. How do you plan to cope with that?

metadata:
  name: orders
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: kafka/my-cluster
spec:
  partitions: 12
  replicas: 3
  config:
    retention.ms: "604800000"
```

The TO reconciles this topic and creates it in Kafka:

```yaml
metadata:
  name: orders
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: kafka/my-cluster
  finalizers:
    - strimzi.io/topic-operator
status:
  topicName: orders
  conditions:
  - type: Ready
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-11-24T17:00:00Z"
```

If Team B creates a `KafkaTopic` also named `orders` in their namespace, it receives a conflict error:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaTopic
metadata:
  name: orders
  namespace: team-b
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Ready
    status: "False"
    reason: ResourceConflict
    message: "Managed by team-a/orders"
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-11-24T17:05:00Z"
```

## Affected/not affected projects

Affected:
- **Topic Operator**: Extended to watch multiple namespaces, cross-namespace conflict resolution
- **Cluster Operator**: Creates RBAC resources for watched namespaces, passes `watchedNamespaces` configuration to the Entity Operator

Not affected:

> - User Operator, Kafka Connect operator, Kafka MirrorMaker operator

Reviewer 3: Maybe instead of this list you can just say that `strimzi.io/cluster` remains the same for any other resource?

- KafkaTopic CRD schema (no changes to spec fields)

## Compatibility

> - The `watchedNamespaces` field is optional with an empty default, preserving existing single-namespace behavior.

Reviewer 2: The single-namespace behavior is to default to the Kafka cluster's namespace when deployed by the CO, or the TO's namespace when standalone.

Reviewer 2: What about this?

Author: Will correct it

- No changes to the `KafkaTopic` CRD spec schema.
- `strimzi.io/cluster` label: the TO accepts both the unqualified form (e.g., `my-cluster`) and the qualified `<namespace>/<name>` form (e.g., `kafka/my-cluster`), but the unqualified form is **deprecated** and logs a warning on each reconciliation. No label changes are strictly required for existing deployments to keep working, but users should migrate to the qualified form. The unqualified form will be removed in a future major version.
- `watchedNamespace` (singular) is deprecated. When `watchedNamespaces` (plural) is set, the singular field is ignored with a deprecation warning logged. The migration path is: `watchedNamespace: team-a` → `watchedNamespaces: [team-a]` — no label, RBAC, or KafkaTopic changes needed.
- Existing `KafkaTopic` resources continue to work without modification.

## Future work

- Multi-namespace support for the User Operator (`KafkaUser` resources) — this will require a separate proposal addressing the security implications of cross-namespace ACL management (see [PR #137 discussion](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/137)).

> - Namespace-level policies to restrict which topic configurations can be set from a given namespace (e.g., allowing infra teams to retain control over certain topic-level configs).

Reviewer 2: If we claim multi-namespace support, users would not expect to be limited by topic names from other teams. In my mind, this is a prerequisite for the current proposal.

I imagine something like this:

```sh
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: KafkaTopicPolicy
metadata:
  name: my-cluster-policy
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: kafka/my-cluster
spec:
  topicNamePrefix: "team-a."
  allowedConfigs:
    - retention.ms
    - cleanup.policy
  maxPartitions: 24
  maxReplicas: 3
  defaults:
    retention.ms: "604800000"
```

Platform teams manage policies per namespace, application teams manage their own topics. When there is no policy, the Topic Operator would apply some sensible default (e.g. namespace prefix). Of course the are many more details to discuss, so I agree that this should be a dedicated proposal.

Author: so in your mind, a proposal about a KafkaTopicPolicy (or a proposal about central management of topic config) is a blocker for this proposal ?

Reviewer 2: > o in your mind, a proposal about a KafkaTopicPolicy (or a proposal about central management of topic config) is a blocker for this proposal ?

This proposal would enable multi-tenancy on a shared Kafka cluster, so topic namespacing is critical IMO. Multi-tenancy is a much broader topic than multi-namespace support, but this is a fundamental piece.

## Rejected alternatives

### New `KafkaNamespaceTopic` CRD

[Issue #1206](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/1206) proposed a `KafkaNamespaceTopic` CRD that would encode the Kubernetes namespace in the Kafka topic name (e.g., `team-a.orders`). This approach was rejected because:

1. **CRD maintenance cost**: Each custom resource is expensive to maintain. A new CRD requires its own controller logic, status management, validation webhooks, documentation, and migration tooling.

> 2. **Forces naming convention**: Encoding the namespace in the topic name forces a specific naming convention (`<namespace>.<topic>`) that may not match existing topic naming patterns or be desirable for all users.

Reviewer 2: That would be just a default, but the user should be able to customize the prefix.

This mirrors the deployment mode documentation for the Cluster Operator.

#### Deprecation of `watchedNamespace` (singular)

The existing `spec.entityOperator.topicOperator.watchedNamespace` field is deprecated in favor of `watchedNamespaces` (plural).

**Deprecation timeline:** `watchedNamespace` continues to work in its current form but logs a deprecation warning on every Cluster Operator reconciliation. It will be removed in a future major version.

**Migration steps:** Convert `watchedNamespace: team-a` to `watchedNamespaces: [team-a]`. Because switching to `watchedNamespaces` enables multi-namespace mode, the `STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS` selector will now require both `strimzi.io/cluster` and `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` labels. Before making this change, add the `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` label to all existing `KafkaTopic` resources (see the migration example below). No RBAC changes are required — the Cluster Operator handles RBAC automatically.

> **Interaction rules:** Setting both `watchedNamespace` and `watchedNamespaces` simultaneously is rejected at admission time via a CEL validation rule on the `Kafka` CRD. Users must migrate to `watchedNamespaces` before adding additional namespaces. When only the singular field is set, the TO behaves exactly as it does today — watching the Kafka cluster's own namespace plus the single additional namespace specified.

Reviewer 2: > the TO behaves exactly as it does today — watching the Kafka cluster's own namespace plus the single additional namespace specified.

Again. This is not how it works today.

Author: fixed

- `strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster`
- `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace: kafka`

**When the label is required:** The `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` label is only needed when `watchedNamespaces` is configured (multi-namespace mode). Single-namespace deployments that do not set `watchedNamespaces` continue to work with `strimzi.io/cluster` alone.

**Kafka-managed deployment:** When the Cluster Operator deploys the Topic Operator with `watchedNamespaces` configured, it automatically sets `STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS` to `strimzi.io/cluster=<cluster-name>,strimzi.io/cluster-namespace=<kafka-namespace>`. The TO then requires both labels to match before reconciling a `KafkaTopic`. This ensures that two TOs watching the same namespace for different clusters with the same name (e.g., `my-cluster` in namespace `kafka` and `my-cluster` in namespace `staging`) never clash — their `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` values differ.

**Standalone deployment:** The operator administrator sets both labels in `STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS`:

```yaml
- name: STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS
  value: "strimzi.io/cluster=my-cluster,strimzi.io/cluster-namespace=kafka"
```

> **Behaviour without the label:** In multi-namespace mode, a `KafkaTopic` that has `strimzi.io/cluster` but lacks `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` will **not** be reconciled by the TO — it will not match the label selector. The TO logs a WARN for such resources to help users identify missing labels. This prevents accidental misrouting when multiple TOs watch overlapping namespaces.

Reviewer 2: What about my suggestion of adding the new label automatically? Did you reject that? Why? That would avoid the need for logging (which anyway should be in batches, not for every single KT).

Author: @fvaleri you mean when the topic is managed via the `strimzi.io/cluster=my-cluster` but still doesn't have the `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` label?

Reviewer 2: Yes, when `watchedNamespaces` is used, the CO should automatically add `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace=<kafka-namespace>` to the `STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS` environment variable passed to the TO.

Main benefits:
1. The `strimzi.io/cluster` label stays unqualified. No deprecation, no migration of existing label values.
2. Single-namespace deployments that don't set `watchedNamespaces` could keep working with just `strimzi.io/cluster=my-cluster` (no CR changes). Logs would not be flooded by unqualified label warnings.

kind: Role
metadata:
  name: strimzi-topic-operator-kafka-my-cluster
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
    strimzi.io/cluster-namespace: kafka
rules:
  - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
    resources: ["kafkatopics", "kafkatopics/status"]
    verbs: ["get", "list", "watch", "create", "patch", "update", "delete"]
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: RoleBinding
metadata:
  name: strimzi-topic-operator-kafka-my-cluster
  namespace: team-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
    strimzi.io/cluster-namespace: kafka
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    name: my-cluster-entity-operator
    namespace: kafka
roleRef:
  kind: Role
  name: strimzi-topic-operator-kafka-my-cluster
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
```

**For wildcard (`*`):**

The Cluster Operator creates a `ClusterRole` and `ClusterRoleBinding` instead:

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: strimzi-topic-operator-kafka-my-cluster
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
    strimzi.io/cluster-namespace: kafka
rules:
  - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
    resources: ["kafkatopics", "kafkatopics/status"]

>     verbs: ["get", "list", "watch", "create", "patch", "update", "delete"]

Reviewer 2: This role definition is not correct and there is some resource missing. We follow the principle of least privilege.

Author: Added the missing resources, but i don't understand why its not correct, (it doesn't include the user and secrets by design, since its only for topic CR)

- Namespace B: `KafkaTopic` with `metadata.name: app-topic`, `spec.topicName: my-topic` (resolves to `my-topic`)

Both reference the same Kafka topic. The conflict resolution rules are:

1. The `KafkaTopic` with the **oldest** `metadata.creationTimestamp` is the owner, regardless of which namespace it is in.
2. All other `KafkaTopic` CRs referencing the same Kafka topic get:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Ready
    status: "False"
    reason: ResourceConflict
    message: "Already managed by another topic operator"
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-11-24T17:00:00Z"
```

This is identical to how the Topic Operator handles conflicts within a single namespace today, extended across namespace boundaries.

**Topic name isolation:** Conflict detection is the mechanism for preventing two teams from accidentally managing the same Kafka topic. It is intentionally reactive rather than preventive — teams *can* share a topic across namespaces (one namespace owns it, others receive a `ResourceConflict` status). For use cases that require strict naming isolation between teams, the recommended approach is to run separate Topic Operator instances per team rather than a shared one.

> **Event starvation:** A single Topic Operator instance reconciling events across many namespaces may be starved if one namespace generates a very high volume of events, delaying reconciliation for other namespaces, to address this we would also implement er-namespace reconciliation queues

Reviewer 2: This is another critical point for me (in addition to topic namespacing support), so we need more details on how this would work for the Topic Operator. The CO uses a thread-per-namespace approach where each thread has its own watch, and that helps to mitigate the noisy neighbor problem (a namespace producing a huge amount of events starving the others).

Author: > In most standard Kubernetes resources, the user's input completely replaces the default rather than extending it. If you want to do it differently, you should provide a clear motivation.

I Think in terms of User's expectation its really beneficial to always include the Kafka Cluster namespace, if it was me i would be surprised to find out if the kafka cluster namespace is not watched. 

   
re: the 2nd comment (im sorry i just can't seem to comment) Agreed, i will update the proposal 

> This is another critical point for me (in addition to topic namespacing support), so we need more details on how this would work for the Topic Operator. The CO uses a thread-per-namespace approach where each thread has its own watch, and that helps to mitigate the noisy neighbor problem (a namespace producing a huge amount of events starving the others).

I tend to agree with the thread-per-namespace approach, but i also think that topics will be modifed/created/deleted in higher frequency, and with the amount of possible namespace, we possibly could reach some limitation around the number of threads (this is not an area i am familiar with, so i might be completely wrong)

thanks @fvaleri

Author: @fvaleri gentle reminder 🙏

> The Topic Operator uses Kubernetes finalizers to ensure that deleting a `KafkaTopic` also deletes the corresponding Kafka topic. The `strimzi.io/topic-operator` finalizer is added and managed exclusively by the Topic Operator — not the Cluster Operator. Users who do not want finalizer-based topic deletion can opt out by setting `spec.topicDeletion: false` on the `KafkaTopic` resource, in which case deleting the CR leaves the Kafka topic intact. This behavior is unchanged in the multi-namespace case.

Reviewer 2: I think your coding agent hallucinated here. There is no `topicDeletion` field.

Author: fixed

1. The finalizer logic deletes the Kafka topic from the Kafka cluster.

> 2. Any other `KafkaTopic` CRs in other namespaces that referenced the same Kafka topic will have their status updated to reflect that the topic no longer exists. They can then be cleaned up by their respective namespace owners, or if left in place, they will attempt to recreate the topic on their next reconciliation (becoming the new owner since no conflict exists).

Reviewer 2: > the same Kafka topic will have their status updated to reflect that the topic no longer exists.

This is also made up. The conflict status remains unchanged until the next periodic reconciliation.

Author: fixed

### Namespace lifecycle considerations

**Adding a namespace to `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator creates RBAC resources in the new namespace and restarts/reconfigures the TO. The TO starts watching the new namespace and reconciles any existing `KafkaTopic` resources in it.

**Removing a namespace from `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator must follow this sequence to ensure finalizers can be cleaned up before RBAC is revoked:

1. While RBAC still exists, the CO removes the `strimzi.io/topic-operator` finalizer from all `KafkaTopic` resources in the namespace being removed.
2. The CO updates the TO configuration to remove the namespace from `watchedNamespaces`.
3. The CO deletes the RBAC resources (`Role`/`RoleBinding`) for that namespace.

This ordering is critical: deleting RBAC before removing finalizers would leave the TO unable to reach the `KafkaTopic` resources, causing finalizers to block any subsequent namespace deletion.

**Watched namespace is deleted:**

> If the TO is running, it processes the finalizers normally — deleting Kafka topics as appropriate. If the TO is not running (or the namespace was already removed from the watch list), `KafkaTopic` resources with finalizers will block namespace deletion. In this case, manual finalizer removal is necessary (e.g., `kubectl patch kafkatopic <name> -n <ns> --type=json -p='[{"op": "remove", "path": "/metadata/finalizers"}]'`). This is an existing limitation of the Topic Operator that applies equally to the single-namespace case, and should be documented as operational guidance.

Reviewer 2: This is working as expected and well documented.

Author: removed

- `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` label: new, only required when `watchedNamespaces` is configured. Single-namespace deployments are not affected. In Kafka-managed mode, the Cluster Operator handles the `STRIMZI_RESOURCE_LABELS` configuration automatically.
- `watchedNamespace` (singular) is deprecated. Setting both `watchedNamespace` and `watchedNamespaces` simultaneously is rejected at admission time via CEL validation on the `Kafka` CRD. The migration path is: `watchedNamespace: team-a` → `watchedNamespaces: [team-a]` — no label, RBAC, or KafkaTopic changes needed.
- Existing `KafkaTopic` resources continue to work without modification in single-namespace mode. When enabling multi-namespace mode (`watchedNamespaces`), existing topics must be labeled with `strimzi.io/cluster-namespace` before the switch (see the migration example in the proposal).

## Future work

- Multi-namespace support for the User Operator (`KafkaUser` resources) — this will require a separate proposal addressing the security implications of cross-namespace ACL management (see [PR #137 discussion](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/137)).

> - **Per-namespace reconciliation queues:** To address the event starvation risk described above, future work may introduce separate reconciliation queues per namespace so that a high-traffic namespace cannot starve reconciliation for others in the same Topic Operator instance.

Reviewer 2: This is the noisy neighbor problem that any multi-tenant solution should address.

Author: added the Per-namespace reconciliation queues as the solution to the event starvation problem

### Topic name resolution

Topic name isolation between namespaces is a **prerequisite** of this proposal. If the Topic Operator watches multiple namespaces, users will expect that a topic declared by one team cannot silently collide with a topic of the same name declared by another team. To guarantee that by default, multi-namespace mode introduces namespace-prefixed topic naming.

**Built-in default (namespace prefix):** When `watchedNamespaces` is configured, the resolved Kafka topic name defaults to:

```
<namespace>.<metadata.name>
```

For example, a `KafkaTopic` named `orders` in namespace `team-a` is materialized in Kafka as `team-a.orders`, while an `orders` in `team-b` becomes `team-b.orders`. The two never collide, so each namespace gets an isolated topic namespace without any per-team configuration.

**Single-namespace mode is unchanged:** When `watchedNamespaces` is not set (single-namespace mode), no prefix is applied — `metadata.name` (or `spec.topicName`) resolves exactly as it does today. This preserves all existing topic names and requires no migration for current deployments.

> **Opt-out via `spec.topicName`:** Setting `spec.topicName` explicitly overrides the prefix and uses the given name verbatim, with no namespace prefixing. This is the deliberate escape hatch for teams that need to address a topic by an exact name — for example to share a single Kafka topic across namespaces, or to adopt a topic created under a different convention. It is the only path that can produce a cross-namespace name collision, which is handled by conflict resolution below.

Reviewer 2: You can't "share a single Kafka topic across namespaces" using spec.topicName, as that would produce a conflicts. Instead, topic adoption use case is good.

- **A namespace watched by a TO that no longer exists or has been removed from the watch list**: Covered in the namespace lifecycle section below. `KafkaTopic` resources with finalizers will block namespace deletion if the TO cannot process them; manual finalizer removal is required as a last resort.

### Namespace lifecycle considerations

**Adding a namespace to `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator creates RBAC resources in the new namespace and restarts/reconfigures the TO. The TO starts watching the new namespace and reconciles any existing `KafkaTopic` resources in it.

**Removing a namespace from `watchedNamespaces`:**
The Cluster Operator must follow this sequence to ensure finalizers can be cleaned up before RBAC is revoked:

1. While RBAC still exists, the Topic operator removes the `strimzi.io/topic-operator` finalizer from all `KafkaTopic` resources in the namespace being removed.
2. The CO updates the TO configuration to remove the namespace from `watchedNamespaces`.
3. The CO deletes the RBAC resources (`Role`/`RoleBinding`) for that namespace.

**Topic Operator restart:**

> On startup, the Topic Operator scans all watched namespaces to rebuild its in-memory conflict resolution map before beginning reconciliation. This is the same process used today for a single namespace, extended to multiple namespaces. Startup time increases linearly with the number of watched namespaces and `KafkaTopic` resources.

Reviewer 2: The map is a deduplication optimization for batching, not a conflict resolution mechanism. It ensures the same Kafka topic doesn't get reconciled multiple times within a single batch cycle. Conflict detection itself remains reactive, happening during reconciliation against the broker.

```

A conflict only arises if both teams deliberately opt out of prefixing by setting the same explicit `spec.topicName` (e.g. both set `spec.topicName: orders`). In that case the oldest CR wins and the other gets a non-leaking `ResourceConflict`:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: Ready
    status: "False"
    reason: ResourceConflict
    message: "Already managed by another topic operator"
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-11-24T17:05:00Z"
```

### Migration example: single-namespace to multi-namespace

This section walks through migrating an existing single-namespace deployment to multi-namespace, covering both the Kafka-managed and standalone modes.

#### Starting state

A Kafka cluster `my-cluster` in namespace `kafka`, with all topics in the `kafka` namespace:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: kafka
spec:
  entityOperator:
    topicOperator: {}
```

Existing topics use only the `strimzi.io/cluster` label:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaTopic
metadata:
  name: orders
  namespace: kafka
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  partitions: 12
  replicas: 3
```

> > **⚠️ Migration is not transparent — existing topic names change unless pinned.** Multi-namespace mode prefixes the resolved Kafka topic name with the namespace for **every** watched namespace, including the Kafka CR's own namespace. A topic `orders` in namespace `kafka` resolves to `kafka.orders` once multi-namespace mode is enabled. Because Kafka topics cannot be renamed, the operator would create a new empty `kafka.orders` topic and stop managing the original `orders` topic (orphaning its data). **Before enabling multi-namespace mode, you must pin every existing topic's current name via `spec.topicName` (Step 1).**

Reviewer 2: An alternative would be to stop clients, pre-create `kafka.orders` topic in Kafka and migrate all data from the original `orders` topic. Then they can update the KT to start managing it.

Therefore, multi-namespace watching is **opt-in and gated**, consistent with how the singular `watchedNamespace` is handled after the CVE fix:

- `watchedNamespaces` is **rejected** (admission-time validation on the `Kafka` CRD; startup error in standalone mode) unless the `STRIMZI_ENTITY_OPERATOR_WATCHED_NAMESPACE_ENABLED` environment variable is enabled.
- The flag defaults to **disabled**. With it disabled, only the TO's own namespace is watched, exactly as today.
- The cluster administrator must consciously enable the flag to allow any cross-namespace watching, which keeps the decision in the hands of whoever controls the operator deployment rather than the tenant who edits the `Kafka` CR.

#### Exposure model

This proposal makes multi-namespace watching available **both** via the `Kafka` CR (`spec.entityOperator.topicOperator.watchedNamespaces`, Cluster-Operator–managed) **and** via the standalone deployment, in both cases behind the gate above.

> There is a competing view (raised in review) that, for symmetry with the User Operator and to keep the Cluster Operator from minting cross-namespace RBAC on a tenant's behalf, multi-namespace watching should be available **only** in standalone mode and not through the `Kafka` CR. This proposal does not adopt that restriction — gating the feature behind a cluster-admin-controlled flag already keeps the privileged decision out of tenant hands, and exposing it through the `Kafka` CR preserves the managed-RBAC convenience that is the main reason to use the Cluster Operator at all. The standalone-only alternative is recorded under [Rejected alternatives](#standalone-only-exposure). Symmetry with a future multi-namespace User Operator is acknowledged as a cross-cutting design concern and is tracked with that work (see [Future work](#future-work)).

Reviewer 2: We don't need to mention review, just update the proposal with the agreed design.
